---
title: 'A perception realized at a whale watch'
date: 2026-04-22
permalink: /posts/2026-04-22-post/
---

Last weekend I went on a whale watch with a philosopher and a historian. At the stern we saw the waves emerged along the trail of the ship. 
The edges of the trail form a cone, as told by one of my physicist friend who also told me that we are able to calculate the shape.
I thought this to be calculated via some complicated fluid dynamics and gave up thinking about it, because I know nothing about fluid. 
But then by the side of a philosopher, I believed that to be a good time to show off.

Interestingly, we really do not need to use fluid dynamics and the answer is much simpler than one thinks. 
The core idea is that, the edges of the trail is none other than the wavefront! We know from 1-D wave equation that the wavefronts travel at a velocity $$v_\rho$$. At each time $$t$$, the ship creates a wavefront traveling left and right. 
Mathematically speaking, for a point $$(x(t),y)$$, $$x(t)$$ is only non-zero when $$t$$ is large enough such that the ship has already reached the point $$y$$. In other words,

$$
|x| = v_\rho (t-t_y) \theta(t-t_y)
$$

where $$t_y = y/v_s$$ and $$v_s$$ is the velocity of the ship. Rearranging, 

$$
|x| + \theta(t-y/v_s) \frac{v_\rho}{v_s}y = v_\rho t \theta(t-y/v_s).
$$

Now for a given $$t$$, we only need to discuss the region where $$y\le v_s t$$. Then all Heaviside function vanishes and

$$
|x| + \frac{v_\rho}{v_s}y = v_\rho t .
$$

This is simply the shape of a cone. The $$dy/dx$$ slope is $$v_s/v_\rho$$, which of course makes sense. 

The takeaway is not just the answer to this specific problem. What is important is that, this is the way a physicist thinks instead of the way a mathematician thinks. A mathematician takes the Navier-Stokes equation and solve every detail of the trail, but no one really understands why a cone forms. And as a physicts, one must grasp the most important feature related to the conic shape---the movement of the wavefront. This should be the idea when doing research that we must realize what is physically most prominent in explaining the particular phenomenon. 


